1 INTRODUCTION
Many online platforms enforce community guidelines using auto-
mated content moderation systems that detect and intervene when
rule breaking occurs, i.e., when user behavior violates community
guidelines [16, 35, 48, 49]. These systems prevent harm by remov-
ing or reducing the visibility of rule-breaking content [17], e.g., by
reducing the number of people who see such content [13]. However,
content removal or visibility reduction may also affect on-platform
user behavior [30, 44]. Moderation interventions may increase com-
pliance with community guidelines, e.g., as deleted comments may
prevent a conversation from derailing [54], or, reversely, backfire
and increase rule breaking, e.g., because sanctioned users perceive
the decision as unfair [7].
Understanding the causal effect of automated content modera-
tion practices on user behavior is vital for evaluating these systems’
effectiveness and can inform their design and use. However, mea-
suring the causal effect of content moderation is difficult because
of the ethical and technical challenges in using randomized experi-
ments (e.g., A/B testing) to study content moderation practices [44].
User 
Comment
Score  
Classifier
Outcome
HiddenNo intervention Deleted 
Figure 1: Comments posted on Facebook are scored by clas-
sifiers that measure adherence to community standards.
When 𝑆 crosses specific thresholds (𝑡hide and 𝑡delete in the fig-
ure), different interventions are applied. Though comments
around each threshold are similar, they receive different in-
terventions, e.g., a comment with score 𝑡delete − 𝜖 is hidden,
while a comment with score 𝑡delete + 𝜖 is deleted. Exploiting
this fact, this work measures the impact of these interven-
tions on user behavior outcomes by studying the discontinu-
ities (𝛽ℎ𝑖𝑑𝑒 and 𝛽delete) around the thresholds𝑡hide and 𝑡delete.
Allowing some users not to be moderated implies not removing con-
tent that may harm others, and malicious actors could exploit the
randomization of potential experiments to post harmful content.
Previous work has extensively documented the role of “man-
ual” content moderation in online communities [30, 41], i.e., where
volunteer moderators find and remove content that breaches com-
munity guidelines. Some research has sought to estimate the effect
of such manual content moderation on online communities, finding
that it positively impacts user behavior [42, 44]. Nevertheless, these
effects may not generalize to automated, platform-level content
moderation. Further, research on content moderation has been typ-
ically descriptive [4, 6, 9, 12, 14, 24] rather than causal, and the
quasi-experimental designs used in previous work are not readily
adapted to an automated setting. For example, some approaches
that rely on the randomness in time it takes for human moderators
to intervene upon rule-breaking content to estimate the effect of
content moderation [44] do not work for automated systems, in
which moderation occurs immediately after content is created.
Present work. We study the effect of automatically enforcing
community guidelines for violence and incitement for Facebook
comments on user behavior with a quasi-experimental approach
illustrated in Fig. 1. We examined subsequent rule-breaking behav-
ior and commenting activity among users whose comments were
moderated (user-level scenario) and among users in threads where
these comments were posted (thread-level scenario). Analyzing
arXiv:2210.10454v3  [cs.CY]  16 Feb 2023

Horta Ribeiro et al.
User C
User B
User C
User B
User A
Most RelevantAll commentsNewest
⚠  Your comment goes against our policy 
⛔  You have been restricted for 24 hours  
or  if it happens again, your account may be restricted 
Agree with the decision
Disagree with the decision
(a) No intervention (b) Hide comment (c) Delete comment + warn user
(Post)(Comments)
Figure 2: Moderation interventions – We depict a hypothetical scenario where User A writes a rule-breaking comment (in red)
on a post by User C (white) that has received a comment by User B , (grey). Depending on the score a comment receives, (a)
no intervention may be applied, in which case the comment is posted, (b) the comment may be hidden, and it will only be
visible if a viewer changes the default comment ranking setting to show all comments, or (c) the comment may be deleted and
the user who posted the comment warned (an additional sanction may be applied depending on their previous rule-breaking
behavior).
over 412M comments, we measured the effect of two different in-
terventions (hiding and deletion; see Fig. 2) on outcomes capturing
commenting activity and rule-breaking behavior (see Sec. 4). Specif-
ically, we estimated the causal effect of content moderation using a
fuzzy regression discontinuity design [22], an approach that capi-
talizes on two design choices commonly used in automated content
moderation systems [10, 46]. First, on many platforms, machine
learning models that predict whether content breaches community
guidelines assign a score of𝑆 to each piece of content, reflecting the
likelihood of that content breaking community guidelines. Second,
when these assigned scores are sufficiently high, platforms may
automatically enforce community guidelines. In other words, if a
score exceeds a predetermined threshold 𝑡 and certain other condi-
tions are met, content may be hidden or deleted immediately.1 Our
approach allows us to mimic a randomized control trial around the
threshold 𝑡 since content with a score right above the threshold
(i.e., 𝑆 = 𝑡 + 𝜖) is similar to content with a score right below (i.e.,
𝑆 = 𝑡 − 𝜖), but only the former is automatically intervened upon by
the content moderation system (which may, e.g., delete it).
Results. Overall, deleting comments reduced rule-breaking be-
havior in the thread where the comment was originally posted.
Deleting comments also reduced rule-breaking among users whose
comments were deleted, i.e., other comments in the thread or that
the user subsequently posted were hidden and deleted less often
after the intervention. At the thread level, deleting rule-breaking
comments significantly decreased rule-breaking behavior in threads
with 20 or fewer comments before the intervention, even among
other participants in the thread. This effect was statistically in-
significant for threads with more than 20 comments. Deletion at
the user level led to a decrease in subsequent rule breaking and
posting activity. But while the decrease in rule breaking persisted
1The regression discontinuity is fuzzy because there is a chance that units (i.e., com-
ments) below the threshold may be treated (i.e., intervened upon) and units above it
may not be treated (i.e., not intervened upon). This can happen because other mecha-
nisms can trigger or prevent interventions on comments with scores below or above
the thresholds (e.g., users may manually report comments under the threshold; other
systems may exclude some comments from intervention).
with time, the decrease in posting activity waned. In other words,
users gradually returned to making posts or comments at a rate
similar to before their comments were deleted but were less likely
to post comments that would subsequently be hidden or deleted.
Hiding (rather than deleting) content had small and statistically
insignificant effects on subsequent user activity and rule-breaking
behavior at both the user and thread levels.
Implications. Deletions of rule-breaking content by automated
content moderation, as currently applied on Facebook, decrease the
subsequent creation of content that goes against community guide-
lines. Our results suggest two ways that this may happen. First,
users whose comments are deleted are less likely to produce subse-
quent rule-breaking content. Second, other users are also less likely
to create rule-breaking comments in the thread where the content
was deleted. Building on previous work that found that “manual”
content moderation [42, 44] can prevent rule-breaking behavior,
here we show that these effects generalize to automated systems
responsible for a substantial fraction of moderation interventions
carried out by major social networking platforms [16, 35, 48, 49].
Though our results are limited in that we can only measure the
effect of content moderation interventions triggered by classifiers
at the thresholds at which they are applied, this study may clarify
their present impact on online platforms such as Facebook. And
while automated content moderation systems are typically assessed
using precision and recall, this work shows how they may also be
evaluated in terms of their effects on subsequent user behavior in
an observational manner that does not require experimentation.
