6 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
Content moderation systems are essential to the functioning of
mainstream social networks [15] and can prevent harm by removing
rule-breaking content before anyone sees or interacts with it [17].
In this work, we studied how these systems may also positively
impact on-platform user behavior. Using a fuzzy regression discon-
tinuity design [22], we found that comment deletion had substantial
and statistically significant effects on subsequent rule-breaking be-
havior and user activity. At the user level, for “first-time offenders, ”
deletions had long-lasting effects on reducing rule breaking, but
only temporary effects on posting activity, suggesting that com-
ment moderation does not necessarily require making a trade-off
between safety and engagement. This result is qualitatively aligned
with the findings of Srinivasan et al. [44] on the r/ChangeMyView
community on Reddit and suggests that automated platform-level
moderation may yield the same effects as manual community-level
moderation. At the thread level, we found that content moderation
reduced rule-breaking activity even for other users who were not
intervened upon. This result is qualitatively aligned with previous
work suggesting that uncivil behavior is contagious [8, 29], further
highlighting the importance of proactive content moderation.
We also found that hiding comments did not have substantial or
significant effects. This may be linked to an important limitation of
our work: we were able to measure the effect of content modera-
tion only at the thresholds at which they were applied. The hiding
intervention may have a stronger effect at a different threshold.
Importantly, this study does not necessarily imply that comment
hiding is not useful, as hiding comments can still prevent harm
by reducing exposure to borderline content and may have other
beneficial effects that we did not measure. In that context, future
work could also find ways to estimate the effect of moderation
across various thresholds. At the same time, the effects of deletion
reported here may also be an underestimate. As interventions on
Facebook are “cumulative, ” when we study the effect of deletion,
we do not compare “deletion” with “no deletion, ” but instead can
only compare “deletion” with “hiding. ” Therefore, it could be that
the effect of deleting content is even stronger, but that part of the
effect is masked by the “hiding” intervention (which, as previously
stated, might itself be impactful if enacted at higher thresholds).
Last, our study is also limited in that we consider specific interven-
tions enacted only upon U.S.-based Facebook users, with effects
that could be heterogeneous across other platforms and countries.
Despite the aforementioned limitations, we argue that, even in this
specific setting, understanding the impact of in-production content
moderation systems is of great importance as a first step toward a
more holistic understanding of how automated moderation systems
impact online platforms such as Facebook.
Last, we argue that the methodology discussed and applied in
this paper can be used to assess moderation interventions across
different scenarios and platforms. While much of the literature on
harmful content has focused on developing methods to accurately
detect such content, here we provide a way to measure the effects
of deploying these systems (and their associated interventions) on
our information ecosystem.
Acknowledgements. We thank the Core Data Science team at
Meta for the useful discussions. West’s lab is partly supported by
grants from Swiss National Science Foundation (200021_185043),
Swiss Data Science Center (P22_08), H2020 (952215), Microsoft
Swiss Joint Research Center, and Google, and by generous gifts
from Facebook, Google, and Microsoft.
